% 2018 Realms Omnibus

# 1: General Player Information # {#general-player-information}

## 1.1: What is the Realms? ## {#what-is-the-realms}

The Realms is a medieval fantasy Live Action Role Playing (LARP) system (also
known as The Realms of Wonder). This game has been in existence since the late
1980s. The Realms has evolved considerably since its inception through the
participation and imagination of more people than can be credited. Unlike most
LARPs today, the Realms has a skill-based combat system, and is community-based
rather than run by a single, static council or corporation.

For those who are not familiar with what playing in a LARP entails, it is a lot
like acting. The difference is that while the event staff sets the stage, the
lines are all yours. You decide what "part" you want to play. Are you a mage, a
warrior, a noble, or all of the above? Once you arrive at the event site you
slip into your character. You stop acting like yourself and begin acting like
your new persona. The Realms uses foam-padded "weapons" to simulate combat and
has an intricate magic system to represent all sorts of things we wouldn’t be
able to do in real life. The system is designed to help resolve situations that
we cannot practically resolve on our own. Specifics of the Realms system will be
discussed in more detail later on. You're in the Realms now and you'll never be
quite the same again.

## 1.2: What is This Book? ## {#what-is-this-book}

The document you are reading is the official rulebook to the Realms. Covered
here you will find what you need to know about combat, magic, and other aspects
of playing the game.

Be sure to know the 2018 Omnibus rules, as well as any specific rules at each
event you attend. At their events, an Event Holder (a player who volunteers to
run an event, hereafter referred to as an EH) may choose to change some of the
rules, including (among other things) announcing special weapon calls, defining
special event-specific spells (Regional Magic), and allowing play-testing of new
rules.

The game rules and the rulebook are updated once a year by a council of EHs in
order to make the game more fun, make the game safer, clarify existing rules,
and encourage increased, improved role-playing. For more information on events
and the Realms, visit [realmsnet.net](www.realmsnet.net).

## 1.3: How Do I Start Playing? ## {#how-do-i-start-playing}

First off, read this rulebook. Read the whole thing. It is also a good idea to
re-read the Omnibus each year so you can be up-to-date on rules modifications
and changes that occur during the Event-Holders Council.

Next, you will need to make a character (the role you play while at events).
Characters are often referred to as Player Characters or PCs. This role will be
the vehicle you experience the Realms through. Creating a character is old hat
to many who have played tabletop role-playing games or other LARPs. If you are
unfamiliar with creating a character or want some tips, see [Part 5: Character
Creation.](#character-creation)

After creating a PC, the best way to become acquainted with the Realms is to
simply go to an event. Most people will be happy to explain to you what's going
on. There is so much that can happen at an event that it is better experienced
than explained. Attending practices is also helpful, as you not only become
acquainted with the combat system, but also get introduced to other players.

### Realms Events ###

An event is where the game is played. There are basically three kinds of events
in the Realms: Feasts, Tournaments, and Quests. Some events take on qualities of
all the types, but are predominantly one of the three. Here is what to expect at
each type:

Feasts
: Feasts, as the name implies, revolve around food. Political posturing and
  court are often held at feast events. There is generally little combat at a
  feast event, and they are usually held indoors in the wintertime. Bardics,
  games of chance or skill, and other such activities can usually be found at
  feasts. Feasts are often a good starting point for some players, particularly
  those more interested in role-playing than in combat.

Tournaments
: Tournament events usually feature contests of both individual and team martial
  skill. These are usually held as yearly events, and are generally a social
  occasion. Players more interested in combat and less interested in
  role-playing and magic find tournament events the best starting point for
  their Realms careers.

Quests
: Quest events are the traditional style of event for saving damsels in
  distress, finding and killing evil demons, and many other tasks. Nearly
  anything can happen at a quest event.

## 1.4: Attending an Event ## {#attending-an-event}

### Registration ###

A list of events can be found on realmsnet.net under the Realms Calendar or the
Events tab. Whenever you plan on attending an event, you should register for it
through realmsnet.net as some events may have caps on how many players can
attend, while others may have different registration requirements or pre-event
information to disperse to players who are planning on attending. Registering
for events also helps give the event staff an idea of how many players they
might expect, and helps them to plan accordingly. It is also important to
register any dietary or medical restrictions you may have.

### Check In ###

When you arrive at an event, there are a few things you must do before beginning
play:

### Event Fees ###

You must pay any event fees; failure to do so means you will not be able
participate in the event and may be asked to leave site. Some events will waive
event fees for staff or NPCs (Non Player Characters) however, you must alway
check with the event holder first. As event fees help pay for the site, props,
prizes, food, and costuming that goes into throwing events, without them future
events would not be able to occur.

### Waivers ###

You may be required to sign a waiver. Waivers serve two purposes: protection
for the EH(s) or the land owners from legal action, and to keep track of how
many people attended an event. Monitoring event attendance is the way for the
Event Holders' Council to determine whether or not an event is legal (more on
what makes a legal event in [Part 7: Realms
Administration](#realms-administration)).

### Magic Items ###

Magic items must be checked in with the EH or the event's Magic Marshal (MM)
before the start of the event. EHs and MMs must know about every magic item at
an event, so that the event can be adjusted, if necessary. EHs and MMs have the
right to fail or disallow any magic item at any time. Using a magic item at an
event without first gaining approval by the EH or MM is cheating.

### Magic ### {#magic-check-in}

Spellcasters must check their spellbook with the EH or the event's MM to find
out whether any of their spells work differently at the event before they cast
any of their spells. Spellcasters with Regional Magic (see [Regional
Magic](#regional-magic)) also generally find out what their magic of the day is
at check-in. Using spells at an event without first gaining approval by the EH
or MM is cheating.

### Weapon Inspection ###

Before beginning play, you must inspect your own weapons before they are used.
If you are unsure of a weapon's safety, ask a marshal to inspect it for you. EHs
may require a designated marshal (referee) to inspect all weapons to make sure
they are safe for use. There must always be someone at an event who can be asked
to inspect weapons in case anyone does not feel comfortable inspecting their own
weapons. If a weapon is deemed unsafe, it is to be removed from play or
repaired.

## 1.5: Alcohol Policy ## {#alcohol-policy}

Alcohol is not permitted unless explicitly allowed by the Event Holder. An event
advertised as damp or wet is informing attendants that alcohol is allowed in
accordance with state and federal laws.

# 2: Core Rules # {#core-rules}

## 2.1: Participant Rights ## {#participant-rights}

The Realms is committed to providing a space that feels as safe and inclusive as
possible. Participants in the Realms have the out-of-character rights to
personal safety and the expectation they will be treated with courtesy and
respect by all other participants in the Realms. Participants have the right to
bring concerns to a marshal or other responsible staff member with the
expectation of having them investigated and appropriately addressed.

Every player has an obligation to read and follow the rules of the Omnibus. EHs
understand that the game can be complex and the first step in dealing with
behavioral issues or cheating in most instances involves ensuring that the
player understands the rules.

However, if a rule is broken, or if there are repeated infractions, an EH may
impose consequences on any participant(s) at their event. These may include a
formal warning; removal from specific sections of an event; removal from an
event; not being allowed to use specific weapons, spells, or items; or
prosecution for violations of Federal and/or State law. If you are removed from
an event for rules violations, the EH is not obligated to refund your event fee.

If an EH subjects a player to a consequence at their event they should notify
all other EHs of this via the Event Holders' List. The player involved must
receive a copy of this notification and may send a formal response. People who
want to bring formal charges should report such charges to the Arbitration
Committee (<arbitration@lists.realmsnet.net>). In addition, any participant that
feels wrongful action was taken against them can bring the issue before the
Arbitration Committee (see [Section 7.3](#arbitration-committee).

An EH may opt to not allow a player who has a history of breaking rules to
attend their events, provided that player is notified in advance.

Event Holders have an obligation to take reports of rules violations at their
events seriously. Having an additional person present during the reporting is
strongly encouraged. If you report a violation to the EH of an event and are
ignored or no reasonable action is taken, bring the situation to the attention
of the Arbitration Committee. Event Holders who have a history of disregarding
reports of rules violations, or who do not address especially serious reports
may face penalties including, but not limited to, temporary loss of EH status,
un-backing of that EH’s magic item(s), revocation of an event’s legal status,
and/or being banned from holding future events.

Reports of rules violations to be submitted after the conclusion of an event
should be submitted to the AC.

## 2.2: Code of Conduct ## {#code-of-conduct}

Anyone can report harassment or abuse. If someone’s behavior towards you has
violated your rights as a participant, or if you witness the same happening to
someone else, immediately report the incident to the EH.

If you have reason to believe rules regarding the Code of Conduct may be
violated at an event, you should notify the Event Holder prior to the event
occurring.

The following list is not meant to be exhaustive, and any non-consensual
violations of a participant’s rights should be considered a violation of the
rules.

Any of the following constitute grounds for punitive action:

* Violating any federal, state, or local laws, facility rules, or event
  policies;
* Failure to comply with the instructions of the Event Holder or designated
  marshal;
* Using anything in an out-of-character threatening or destructive manner
  against person or property;
* Endangering the safety of oneself or others;
* Stealing (People’s tents, bags, packs, pouches, and possessions are completely
  off-limits and out-of-play. There are no exceptions, even if officially
  in-play items are concealed therein);
* Drinking alcohol under the age of 21, or providing alcohol to those under age
  21;
* Physical or verbal intimidation or abuse;
* Stalking;
* Inappropriate physical contact or proximity. Any form of unwanted physical
  contact is strictly forbidden;
* Non-consensual sexual acts (a person under the age of consent cannot consent
  to sexual acts);
* Inappropriate sexual attention, whether verbal or physical, or continued
  attention after being asked to stop (sexual attention towards those legally or
  physically unable to consent is always inappropriate, this includes people
  under the age of consent);
* Harassment for any reason, including out-of-game attributes such as race,
  weight, sexual orientation, gender identity, religion, or disability.

Role-play can never be used as an excuse for any of these behaviors. If you are
informed that your role-playing is OOC unsafe, threatening, or is not consented
to by other participants you should stop immediately and find another way to
play out the scene.

## 2.3: The Safety Rules ## {#the-safety-rules}

The safety rules are out-of-character (hereafter referred to as OOC). They are
for our safety, and provide the guidelines that we should all be playing by.

### The Rules We Play By ###

1. We should all be doing this to have fun. If you get mad or uncontrolled, it
   is up to you to remove yourself from the game until you have regained your
   composure.
#. This is a sport of personal honor; treat it as such. You are responsible for
   keeping track of many aspects of this game, such as weapon blows and known
   spells. Failure to report or accurately respond to any of these aspects is
   cheating and a stain on your personal honor.
#. You must listen to the marshals at all times; they are the referees. If you
   are caught breaking the rules, a marshal may remove you from all or part of
   that event.
#. Report any safety concerns to a marshal immediately. If you have any
   questions, it is up to you to ask.
#. HOLD: If you see a harmful or unsafe situation (e.g., someone is about to run
   into a tree, gets their glasses knocked off, has had their weapon really
   broken in combat, is about to fall off a cliff, etc.) yell the word "Hold."
   If someone is injured, it is the primary responsibility of the person who is
   hurt to call a Hold. Before calling a Hold for someone else in an otherwise
   safe situation, you must first ask if they are all right. Holds should only
   be called in the event of a dangerous situation, and should never be used to
   discuss the rules. If you hear the word "Hold," stop immediately, then say
   "Hold" until everyone else has stopped moving. Once the emergency has been
   dealt with, a "Lay-On" (continue play) will be called either by a qualified
   marshal, or the person who originally called the Hold. Do not resume play
   until a Lay-On has been called.
#. Only weapons and shields that have been made following the construction
   guidelines (see [Section 3.8: Weapon Construction](#weapon-construction)) are
   to be used. Weapons should be checked between combat situations to ensure
   continued safety. A qualified marshal may be requested to check the safety of
   any weapons or shields at any time. Any new designs or materials must be
   inspected and approved by the EH or a designated marshal before use.
#. There is to be NO real steel in any combat situation, or in any potential
   combat situation, at any time. Real steel is defined as metal knives, swords,
   axes, darts, spikes, spurs, etc. - anything that could really hurt a
   participant. Real steel that is sheathed is still a potential hazard.
#. Acts considered unlawful in the real world, such as theft of non-game items
   or assault, are also unlawful in the Realms. For the safety of all
   participants, any form of unwanted physical contact is strictly forbidden.
#. Any spell props, weapon props, or materials not specifically allowed within
   the Omnibus must be inspected and approved by the EH or a designated marshal
   before they are used.
#. While the wording of the game rules may occasionally be less than clear,
   players should not use any such confusion to their own advantage. A simple
   guideline is to not assume any benefits unless they are specifically granted
   by a rule. If you feel that the way a rule is written grants you an advantage
   by omission of a statement to the contrary, you must review that rule with a
   marshal or EH prior to utilizing that advantage. While this document has a
   lot of general rules (such as [Section 6.1: Basic Magic Effects Everyone
   Should Know](#basic-magic-effects-everyone-should-know)), any specific rule
   will always override these general rules.

### The Rules We Fight By ###

11. This is a lightest touch sport. ANY contact with a weapon to a body is to be
    taken as a hit. Ignoring a "light" blow is cheating and a marshal may remove
	you from the fight. There are to be NO full-strength swings. A marshal may
	remove you for excessive blow strength. Weapons, melee and missile, should
	be used with the minimum force necessary to score a successful hit.
#.  The face (eyebrows to chin) and throat area are "off-target." Do not aim for
    these areas. You may choose not to accept a blow that hits you solely in
	these areas, but you must call the location that was hit. For instance, if
	you are hit in the face, call "Face," and keep fighting if you wish. This
	alerts both the other combatant and the marshal that you have taken an
	illegal blow. It is not unusual for shots to an off-target area to also
	strike legitimate areas in the same strike. You must take all legal blows,
	even if an off-target area was hit by the same strike. For example, a shot
	thrown at your head may hit your face if you pull back, but if it touches
	your forehead in the process, that is a legal blow.
#.  In combat, there is to be contact with weapons only (e.g., weapons hitting
    weapons, weapons hitting bodies, and weapons hitting shields only). There is
	to be NO body contact of any kind (e.g., no shoving, punching, kicking,
	biting, grabbing, etc.). Do NOT grab an opponent's weapons and/or shield.
#.  Do NOT charge. Charging is defined as running at someone so that they have
    to get out of your way to avoid illegal contact.
#.  Shields are for blocking ONLY. Your shield should never be used as a weapon.
    Shield-bashing or other shield contact with another person is unsafe.
#.  Pommels, no matter how padded, are not legal striking surfaces. Do not punch
    or thrust with the pommel of a weapon.
#.  Do NOT ever throw a weapon at a participant, unless that weapon is of a type
    (magic missile, javelin, or lightning bolt) sanctioned by the rules for
	throwing. No thrown weapon or missile weapon should strike a participant
	above the shoulders.
#.  Arrows should be drawn with minimal pull necessary to score a successful
    hit. Bows should NEVER be used to parry an attack. As with thrown weapons,
	arrows should not strike a participant above the shoulders.

# 3: Combat in the Realms # {#combat-in-the-realms}

## 3.1: The Combat System ## {#the-combat-system}

The Realms uses a lightest-touch system for its combat system. That means that
no matter how lightly your opponent may touch you with their weapon, you have to
take the shot. This is to keep the sport friendly, so that everyone can play.
This system does not allow for "scratches" or "light blows" - you must take
these shots as normal blows. In all cases, the phrase, "if you are struck,"
refers to any time you are struck by the padded surface of any weapon or spell
prop that does damage as a weapon.

### Hit Locations ###

Your body is separated into seven locations of which there are two kinds. Your
arms and legs are "limbs," while your head and the front and back of your torso
are "kill locations." If you become confused about exactly where one location
stops and another begins, thinking of a Barbie™ doll may help. The buttocks of a
person are considered leg shots. If you are hit in the buttock(s), you lose the
appropriate leg(s).

### Killing Blows ###

If you are struck in a kill location your PC is dead (see [Section 3.4:
Character Death](#character-death) and [Section 3.5: Scalping](#scalping) for
more details).

If you are hit on the top of the shoulder, your PC is dead. If you are wearing
armor, a blow to the top of the shoulder is considered a blow to the front or
back depending on whether your opponent is in front of you or behind you.

### Limb Shots ###

If you are struck in a limb, your PC loses the use of that entire limb. If you
are struck in a limb that has already been lost, and that limb blocked what
could have possibly been a legal shot to another location, then that location
should be considered hit. You cannot protect the side of your PC's body with a
disabled arm or by lifting a disabled leg up to block. Once your PC's limb has
been disabled, it should be put behind you. This keeps it out of the way as well
as provides a visual cue to other players that your PC is hurt. Once you have
lost a limb, your PC cannot use that limb at all. Don't limp on a damaged leg.

### Hand-on-Weapon ###

If you are struck on a hand that is holding anything that is legal to block or
parry with (weapons and shields, but not bows, javelins or arrows), it is
considered gauntleted and immune to damage. When this happens, call out "Hand"
or "Hand-on-weapon." If you are struck on a hand that is not holding anything
you can parry with, even if you have just taken it off for a second, it is
considered a legal limb shot and your PC has to suffer the consequences. Your
hand is considered everything below the wrist bone.

### How to Take Multiple Hits ###

Should an opponent's weapon (be it a melee weapon, missile weapon, or spell
prop) hit you in more than one location with the same swing, all points of
contact count as hits.

## 3.2: Combat Etiquette ## {#combat-etiquette}

Combat is an important part of the game. In order to make the game more fun for
everyone, combat etiquette, which is OOC, has been developed. Using combat
etiquette helps avoid confusion and promotes the same kind of behavior when
someone else is fighting you.

### Calling Hits ###

It is your responsibility to call where you were hit in combat. This is to let
the other participant(s) and the marshals know that you were hit, and where you
were hit. Calling armor, protections, and other effects is also your
responsibility. Armor must always be called, even when a PC is dead. It is not
acceptable to call another player's hits for them. If you feel that another
participant is consistently miscalling their hits, missing shots, or some other
form of cheating, please alert a marshal. It is acceptable to ask your opponent
if they were hit, calling their attention to the location.

### Late Shots ###

Sometimes you will strike another participant immediately after receiving a hit
that injures or kills your PC. For example, just before your sword makes contact
with an opponent, your attacking arm is struck by another weapon. Even though
you are incapable of physically halting your attack, the injury your PC received
renders the hit ineffective. There is no "follow through" effect that allows
your attack to be successful. This is called a late shot. If you deliver a late
shot, it is your responsibility to inform your opponent to not take the blow.
Common phrasing includes "Don't take that!" or "Late, on your arm!" Like other
shots, you may not declare that someone else hit you late. If you think someone
is failing to call their late shots, question them after combat ends, or bring
your concern to a marshal.

### Illegal Hits ###

Sometimes you may hit someone with a part of your weapon that doesn't actually
damage their PC, such as the pipe of a weapon, the side of a thrust-only weapon
(see [Section 3.7: Weapon Rules](#weapon-rules)), or the shaft, fletching or
nock of an arrow or javelin. If you do this, be sure to call "Don't take that!"
to alert them that it wasn't a legal hit, and that they may resume play as if
the hit never occurred. A player may also call "shaft" if they received an
illegal hit from an arrow or javelin, or call "slash" if they received an
illegal hit from a thrust-only weapon.

### Missing Shots ###

Sometimes in the thick of battle people miss shots, because of adrenaline or
focus. This is generally unintentional and accidental. It often stops once a
fighter has more experience in calling and feeling their shots. Repeatedly
missing shots or intentionally missing shots is different and is cheating. If
you repeatedly miss shots, you may be asked to get retrained in fighting, or may
be asked to stop playing.

### Off-Target Areas ###

Your face and the front of your throat are off-target; players should never aim
attacks there. If you are hit in either location, you should announce it even
though the hit has no game effect. Face is considered the area on your head
below your eyebrows, in front of your ears. Throat is considered the
forward-facing section of your neck, above the sternum. The forehead from the
eyebrows up, the back and top of your head, and the sides and back of your neck
are all legal targets.

Should an opponent's weapon hit you in more than one location with the same
swing and one or more of those blows land in an off-target area (such as your
face or your throat), you still have to accept those blows which did land in
legal locations.

Breast shots and groin shots are legal and considered killing shots, but such
shots are highly discouraged. Everyone is encouraged to wear protective gear to
avoid injury to sensitive areas.

You should never deliberately aim for an off-target area (face with any weapon,
or head with a ranged weapon) or the groin or breasts. Accidents happen, but if
you frequently target these sensitive areas it will indicate to others that you
are not a safe and controlled fighter, and you may be asked to sit out by a
marshal.

## 3.3: Armor ## {#armor}

### Types of Armor ###

Your PC may be able to wear armor. Armor allows a PC to take blows without
taking injuries. There are two kinds of armor: heavy and light. Heavy armor will
absorb two blows per hit location before you have to take the shot. Light armor
will absorb one blow per hit location.

Light armor is a thin, pliable kind of armor. Light armor can be made out of
multiple layers of quilting or a moderate weight of leather. A quilted cloth
jerkin or a thin leather helmet are examples of 1-point armor. Garment-weight
leather (such as suede pants or moccasins) is not suitable for light armor.

Heavy armor is in general bulkier, rigid, and more cumbersome than light armor.
Hard-boiled leather, heavy-weight leather, studded leather/cloth, brigandine,
and chainmail/platemail are classic examples of 2-point armor. Any armor that is
studded must have at least one metallic component every square inch to count as
heavy armor.

Armor must allow you to feel blows through it and it must look like it would fit
in a medieval or fantasy setting. 

### Calling Your Armor ###

Armor protects by hit location, so if you have more than one piece of armor on a
hit location, it is all considered damaged when you are struck there. On the
other hand, if one piece of armor covers more 
than one hit location, it is treated as separate hit locations. The armor hit
locations are divided up by the hit locations for taking wounds and kills. Light
armor allows you to call out "Armor 1" on that hit location and the next blow
will do damage. If you are wearing heavy armor you should call out "Armor 1"
then "Armor 2" before the hit location takes damage. 

You can be wearing armor on a hit location yet still have some areas of that hit
location that are not covered. These sections are also considered armored if at
least 75% of the entire hit location is covered by armor. If some of that armor
is light and some is heavy then the uncovered areas can only call out "Armor 1".
If all of the armor on the hit location is heavy then then the uncovered areas
can call both points of armor. A marshal should be asked to rule whether or not
75% of the location is covered in any case where it is ambiguous.

For example, if you are wearing a thin leather upper-arm bracer and a metal
lower-arm bracer on your right arm, only a leather upper-arm bracer on your left
arm, and a chainmail shirt that goes down to your knees: a shot to anywhere on
your lower-left arm disables your PC's left arm. The upper bracer was not struck
and thus has no benefit. A shot to the upper portion of your left arm damages
the upper-arm bracer. Your PC still has the limb, but the armor on that limb is
gone. A shot to the lower-right arm bracer damages all the arm armor. You still
have a point of armor left on the lower bracer, but if you are hit on the
upper-right arm bracer, your PC will lose the limb. Had the next shot also hit
the right lower-arm bracer, all the right arm armor would be gone. Three shots
to a leg covered by the chainmail skirt would destroy all of the armor on that
leg and disable the PC's leg as well. Even though the armor protecting the leg
and the armor protecting the torso is all one piece, you can still take two
shots to the armor on your front torso, back torso, and your other leg before
the armor in those locations is completely destroyed.

## 3.4 Character Death ## {#character-death}

As players experience the game through the eyes of their characters, PC death
becomes an important aspect of the game.

### Death ###

Death occurs in many ways. Usually, death of a character happens when something,
such as a weapon, hits a character in an unarmored kill location. Certain spells
may also kill a character, from magic missiles to ingesting poisons or other
more esoteric means. Death renders the character incapable of any action until
such time as a spellcaster or item, with the power to heal the dead, raises the
character, or magic that regenerates or animates them takes effect.

Death can be repaired by many spells, abilities, and items. Be sure to go over
[Part 3: Combat in the Realms](#combat-in-the-realms) and [Section 6.1: Basic
Magic Effects Everyone Should Know](#basic-magic-effects-everyone-should-know)
for more details on what causes and cures death.

In the Realms there are two states of death. They are death (or dead), and
scalped (see [Section 3.5](#scalping) for more information on Scalping).

If your PC is dead or scalped, you should lie or sit still. Try not to look
around or talk. Do your best to role-play a corpse. Don't get upset if someone
hits you with a killing blow when you are already dead. If somebody does this
just say, "Dead." They are making sure that you really are dead.

In tournaments, or other high combat situations, it is acceptable for a
character to move out of the way to avoid being stepped on. They may resume
their death act in a safer place. They may also sit or kneel to avoid injuries.
If you are role-playing death in any of these forms, you should put your weapon
over your head to signify your character is dead.

If someone looks at you and asks you to describe your wounds, do your best to
comply. If you were backstabbed and you're lying on your back, tell them they
don't see any wounds. Then, if they roll you over to look at your back, tell
them they see a deep wound in your back.

When your PC is killed (dead, but not scalped) and then raised, they may
remember everything up until the point of their death.

### Playing Dead ###

It is legal for characters to lie down and pretend they are dead, but they may
not put their weapons over their head. If someone asks a player if their
character is dead, the player and the character are not obligated to answer, but
if a player is asked to describe their character's wounds, they should do so as
accurately and honestly as possible. If their character is not really dead and
someone comes close to them to loot their character's body, they are free to
attack the unsuspecting looters. If you are unsure as to whether someone's
character is dead and want the character to be, tap the player gently in a kill
location.

## 3.5: Scalping ## {#scalping}

Scalping is the removal of a character's life essence through mutilation of the
body. It is a more serious form of death that requires more than a simple spell
to repair. Scalped characters cannot be raised or animated until their soul has
been restored.

### Scalps ###

A scalp is a token carried by each player, which represents the life essence of
that player's character. Players must be carrying their PC's scalp at all times;
unless the PC is dead and scalped (see below), or unless they are under the
influence of a spell which removes the PC's scalp. Scalps must have their
player's name and the PC's name written legibly on it. A scalp does not exist
physically in the IC world therefore it cannot be searched. A scalp is a
non-magical and non-stealable marshaling tool.

### How Characters are Scalped ###

In order to scalp a body, you must strike 200 blows with a weapon beside the
body of the character being scalped. More than one person may scalp a body at a
time. More than one weapon may be used to scalp a body as well. This effectively
divides the number of blows to be struck between the number of participants and
number of weapons used. Some monsters and characters under certain spells may
require more scalping blows to completely destroy. If you strike 200 blows and
the victim says "The job is not yet done," then the scalping is not yet
complete. Some spells, such as [Strange Brew: Potion of Acid](#strange-brew) and
[Assassin’s Blade](#assassins-blade), may accelerate the act of scalping.

After the scalping is finished, the player of the scalped character must present
their character's scalp to the character that just scalped them. It is then that
player's responsibility to present the scalp to an EH or an appointed marshal.
The EH must be informed immediately of the scalping, thus allowing the EH time
to prepare for those who might wish to return the scalped character to life.

Characters that are pretending to be dead should interpret any scalping blows as
blows to the closest kill location. So, if your PC is pretending to be dead and
someone starts to scalp them, the first blows that are struck on the ground next
to you should be played as if they were striking your PC on the nearest kill
location, destroying any undamaged armor, and then killing them.

If your PC is killed and scalped, they will not remember anything about how they
died should they manage to be raised.

Should your PC be dead at the end of an event without being raised, even if the
character was not actively scalped, the PC will be considered scalped.

### Fixing a Scalped Character ###

To restore someone to life after scalping, characters must first have the body
of the person needing to be raised. Then characters must either cast a [Call the
Soul](#call-the-soul), an [Intervention](#intervention) spell, or administer a
Potion of Soul Snare (see [Strange Brew](#strange-brew)) to summon and reattach
the scalp. If characters lack the body, only an [Intervention](#intervention)
spell will be able to return the scalped PC back to life. When the body and
scalp are reunited, characters must cast one [Raise Dead](#raise-dead) spell for
each event (including the first) since the scalped PC was scalped in order to
raise them. A different spellcaster must provide each [Raise Dead](#raise-dead)
spell used for this purpose.

## 3.6: Permanent Death ## {#permanent-death}

When a PC is dead and scalped at the end of an event at which they were at some
point alive, they get a "tick." PCs may also receive ticks due to use of certain
magic items or plot interactions. A PC is only obligated to accept one
involuntary tick per event. A PC that accumulates three or more ticks is
permanently dead, as their soul can no longer be restored by any means. On
January 1st of each new year, one tick is removed from each PC that has any,
unless they are already permanently dead. If a PC is killed and scalped during
an event, but returned to life before the end of the event, they do not get a
tick.

For a scalping to be official, it must be brought to the EH's attention. The EH
must provide the Death Marshal with this scalping information from their events.
A tick may only be issued or reported by a legal EH of the event where the tick
was incurred or by the player whose PC received the tick. The Death Marshal will
keep track of this information. The current Death Marshal is Keith Cronyn who
can be reached at <Keith.Cronyn@gmail.com> or at 603-819-8689.

## 3.7: Weapon Rules ## {#weapon-rules}

Players are responsible for being safe with the weapon(s) they are using. Before
using a weapon style in-game, players should take it upon themselves to be
properly trained by a marshal or someone who is safe and proficient with that
weapon style.

### Wielding Weapons ### {#wielding-weapons}

For the purposes of the rules, you are wielding a weapon or shield if you are
holding it in your hand(s) and you attack, parry, or block with it. You are
wielding a combination of weapons and/or a shield if you attack, parry, or block
with either of them. Simply holding a weapon, or menacing with it, does not
count as wielding unless contact is made. You cannot wield more than one item in
a hand at once.

If you are wielding an illegal weapon or combination and you attack, then you
should tell the target "Don't take that." If something you are not wielding
blocks a shot, then you should treat the blow as if it had landed. If you are
not sure where that blow would have landed, then assume it would hit the
location that would cause you the most harm (e.g., an unarmored kill location).
There are special restrictions for spellcasters in terms of wielding and
blocking with different weapons, and specific consequences for doing so outside
of the spellcaster’s restriction. See [Breaking Weapon
Restrictions](#breaking-weapon-restrictions) for more information.

The size of a weapon dictates how it may be wielded. Weapons cannot be any
smaller than 12", and cannot exceed 8' in length.

+-------------+-------------------------+
| Length      | Weapon Type             |
+============:+:========================+
| 12" to 3'8" | One-handed              |
+-------------+-------------------------+
| 3'8" to 5'  | Hand-and-a-half         |
+-------------+-------------------------+
| 4' to 5'    | One-handed, no          |
|             | florentine, thrust-only |
+-------------+-------------------------+
| 5' to 6'6"  | Two-handed              |
+-------------+-------------------------+
| 6'6" to 8'  | Two-handed, thrust-only |
+-------------+-------------------------+

Table: Weapon Length Quick Guide

### One-Handed Weapons ###

You can wield a one-handed weapon or shield in one hand and still use another
one-handed weapon or shield in the other hand. Using two one-handed weapons (up
to 3'8" each) together, one in each hand, is commonly called a "Florentine"
combination. Magic Missiles are also considered one-handed weapons, but follow
special rules (see [Magic Missile](#magic-missile), under Spell Descriptions).

### Hand-and-a-Half Weapons ###

If a weapon is considered hand-and-a-half, then you can use the weapon with one
hand, but your other arm or hand cannot be holding a weapon or a shield.
Lightning bolts are also considered hand-and-a-half weapons. Bows are wielded as
hand-and-a-half weapons, but follow special rules (see [Bows](#bows) below).

### Two-Handed Weapons ###

If a weapon is two-handed, you may only wield the weapon with two hands. Every
blow you strike must be started with two hands. If you lose an arm while
wielding a two-handed weapon, you may not attack with that weapon. You may parry
with a two-handed weapon with only one hand, but only if you are not wielding
something else with your other hand.

Every blow you strike with a two-handed weapon must begin with both hands on the
weapon. If you let go with one hand during the swing, the swing is still legal.
Once the initial swing has ended, the attacker will have to grab the weapon with
two hands again before making another attack.

### Thrust-Only Weapons ###

Thrust-only weapons cannot strike an opponent with a "slashing" or side-to-side
motion. If you slash at an opponent with a thrust-only weapon, you must tell
them "Don't take that." As long as the tip of the weapon strikes with a forward
motion the blow must be taken. If you are not certain that a thrust-only strike
landed properly, you must assume it was a slash and tell your opponent not to
take the shot.

### Spears (Thrust-only) ###

A spear is a thrust-only weapon between 4' and 5' in length. These weapons may
be used as a single-handed weapon if used alone or with a shield. Spears may not
be used with other weapons. Their length must be between 1/3 to 1/2 covered in
foam and they must be clearly labeled with the word "Spear" on the blade. Once
being labeled as a spear the weapon must stay thrust-only even if it is legally
made to regular slashing hand-and-a-half standards.

### Bows ### {#bows}

A bow is wielded as if it were a hand-and-a-half weapon. This means that it may
not be held when a weapon or shield is being wielded in your other hand, but it
is legal to fire it with one hand— if you can! A bow is not considered a
"weapon" for purposes of determining whether a spell fails; arrows are
considered weapons and will cause some spells to fail.

Bows must have a draw-weight of 30 pounds or less. Just like melee weapons, you
should be careful on how hard your arrows are striking your opponent. Arrows
should be drawn with the minimal pull necessary to score a successful hit.

If a weapon hits a wielded bow or nocked arrow, the bow is "broken" and may no
longer be used in combat. Anyone can fix a broken bow by holding the bow with
both hands, then counting to 200 seconds. You cannot actively parry with a bow
or an arrow.

### Javelins ###

A javelin is wielded as if it were a single-handed weapon. This means that it
may be held when a weapon or shield is being wielded in your other hand. A
javelin is considered a weapon for the purposes of spells.

### Missile Weapons ###

Projectile weapons such as arrows, crossbow bolts, spells (like Magic Missile),
and javelins cannot be targeted at your opponent's head. Head shots from
projectile weapons, even if they did not hit the face or the throat, do not have
to be taken as legal shots.

Being struck with any portion of the foam head of the arrow or javelin will
cause damage. The shaft, fletching, and nocks of arrows and javelins do not
cause damage.

All projectile weapons, with the exception of arrows and javelins, are live and
inflict damage on any target they hit until they come to rest, regardless of
whether they hit the ground, a wall, a weapon, a tree, or any other obstacle
along the way. In the case of arrows and javelins, an arrow or javelin is
considered live and is able to inflict damage until it comes into contact with
the ground. If an arrow or javelin hits you after it comes into contact with the
ground it does no damage. It is the responsibility of the player wielding the
bow or javelin to tell you not to take the blow.  A player may also call "shaft"
if they received an illegal hit from an arrow or javelin.The length of javelins
and arrows are not subject to a spellcaster's weapon restriction.

## 3.8: Weapons Construction ## {#weapon-construction}

There are several ways to make weapons in the Realms. If you are playing for the
first time, it might be a better idea to borrow weapons than try to make any of
your own. Once you have seen what other weapons have looked like and asked a few
questions on how others have made their weapons, then you will be better
prepared to construct your own.

Be sure to follow these guidelines when constructing a weapon:
* All non-missile melee weapons must be made out of lightwall PVC, fiberglass,
  or bamboo cores as noted in the table below. There can be nothing in the core.
  Both ends must be capped with a rigid material.
* All weapons must have a thrusting tip (the pipe foam that extends beyond the
  tip of the pipe) as noted below.
* A weapon’s striking surface must be made from closed-celled foam pipe
  insulation, which must be at least 5/8" thick and which must be firmly
  strapping-taped in place. All striking surfaces must be covered in either duct
  tape or fabric. Only magic weapons should be made with a blue-colored striking
  surface, and you may only make a magic weapon through the use of spells in the
  magic system, or if you are releasing one as an EH.

+--------------------+---------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+---------------+
| Length             | Core          | Thrusting | Camp      | Squishy   | Minimum Foam  |
|                    |               | Tip       | Foam Disk | Foam Tips | Coverage      |
+:==================:+:=============:+:=========:+:=========:+:=========:+:=============:+
| 12" - 44"          | 1/2", 3/4",   | 1 3/4"    | Not       | Not       | Half of       |
|                    | or 1" PVC     |           | Required  | Required  | weapon length |
+--------------------+---------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+---------------+
| 12" - 44"          | 3/4" bamboo   | 1 3/4"    | 1/4"      | Not       | Half of       |
|                    | or fiberglass |           |           | Required  | weapon length |
+--------------------+---------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+---------------+
| \>44" - 60"        | 3/4", or 1"   | 1 3/4"    | Not       | Not       | Half of       |
|                    | PVC           |           | Required  | Required  | weapon length |
+--------------------+---------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+---------------+
| \>44" - 60"        | 3/4" bamboo   | 1 3/4"    | 1/4"      | Not       | Half of       |
|                    | or fiberglass |           |           | Required  | weapon length |
+--------------------+---------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+---------------+
| Spears\            | 3/4", or 1"   | 2 1/4"    | 1/4"      | 2"        | One-third     |
| (48" - 60")        |  PVC          |           |           |           | weapon length |
+--------------------+---------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+---------------+
| Spears\            | 1/2" bamboo   | 2.5" *    | 1/4"      | 3"        | One-third     |
| (48" - 60")        |               |           |           |           | weapon length |
+--------------------+---------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+---------------+
| \>60" - 78"\       | 3/4", or 1"   | 2 1/4"    | Not       | 2"        | Half of       |
| (6'6")             |  PVC          |           | Required  |           | weapon length |
+--------------------+---------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+---------------+
| \>60" - 78"\       | 3/4" bamboo   | 2 1/4"    | 1/4"      | 2"        | Half of       |
| (6'6")             | or fiberglass |           |           |           | weapon length |
+--------------------+---------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+---------------+
| Pikes\             | 1" PVC        | 2 1/4"    | 1/4"      | 2"        | One-third     |
| (>78" - 96")       |               |           |           |           | weapon length |
+--------------------+---------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+---------------+
| Pikes\             | bamboo        | 3" *      | 1/4"      | 3"        | One-third     |
| (>78" - 96")       |               |           |           |           | weapon length |
+--------------------+---------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+---------------+
| Arrows             | golf tube,    | 2"        | Not       | 2"        | 6"+           |
|                    | aqua tube, T8 |           | Required  |           |               |
|                    | fluorescent   |           |           |           |               |
|                    | light covers  |           |           |           |               |
+--------------------+---------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+---------------+

\* add 5" camp/yoga foam sleeve starting beneath the foam disk extending away
from the tip

### Double-bladed weapons (including Marns) ###

* No surface of a double-bladed one-handed slashing weapon may be shorter than
  6".
* The overall (combined) foam length must still be at least half the length of
  the weapon.
* Each striking surface of a double-bladed slashing weapon of hand-and-a-half
  length or longer must be at least 1/3 the total weapon length.
* Weapons with a non-bladed portion longer than the shorter of the two blades
  must provide non-damaging covering foam or other padding as a courtesy to
  shield the exposed core.

### Arrows, Javelins, and other Missile Weapons ###

__T8 and Aqua Tube Arrows__

* All arrows must have 2" thrusting tips, 4" of pipe foam, and 2" squishy-foam
  tips to be considered safe.
* All arrows must be made from 3/4" or 1" diameter tubing.
* All arrow tube shafts must be capped on the arrowhead end of the shaft with a
  rigid material. Examples of acceptable cap materials include, but are not
  limited to, rigid plastics (such as milk jug caps or film canister caps) or a
  single washer (non-metal washer) or coin. Any such rigid materials must be
  appropriately sized to match the arrow shaft in diameter.
* Arrows may not be weighted in any way beyond the materials necessary for safe
  construction. Weighting includes the attachment of multiple rigid caps.
* All aqua tube shafts should, at minimum, be covered by two lengths of
  strapping tape.
* Lightning Bolt props are the only "arrow" props that should be made solely
  from white duct tape. Arrows may have a white head or shaft, but not both.
* Whether custom-designed arrows are allowed is up to the individual EH’s
  discretion.

__LARP Arrows__

* Head must be permanently affixed, commercially manufactured, designed to be
  "larp safe" or "archery tag safe" with squishy foam, and have a minimum
  diameter of 2 1/8" on the striking surface.
* Shaft must be made from either unbreakable or safety fiberglass, covered in a
  minimum of 2 layers of fiberglass reinforcing tape (strapping tape), and be no
  longer than 28" measured from the end of the nock to the base of the arrow
  head.
* Nocks must be permanently affixed and must be manufactured and designed to be
  "larp safe" or "archery tag safe".

[__Lightning Bolts__]{#lightning-bolt-construction}

A Lightning Bolt prop is an arrow or javelin made with the following additional
details:

* It must be primarily white. 
* It must be between 2’6" and 3’6" in length. The prop is not subject to the
  spellcaster’s weapon length restriction.
* It must have the words "Lightning Bolt" and the spellcaster’s name written
  visibly along the shaft.
* It cannot have an arrow nock.
* It must not have the word "Javelin" on it if it is a javelin prop.

__Javelins__

* Javelins may be constructed using golf tubes or aqua tubes with foam coverage
  on at least 1/3 the weapon length.
* Javelins cannot be nocked, and must have foam coverage on the non-damaging end
  of the shaft.
* Javelins must be made from new pipe foam and must have squishy-foam heads.
* Any fletching added must be made out of foam, and the javelin may not be
  weighted in any way.
* Javelins must be between 2’6" and 5’ in length.
* The word "Javelin" must also be written on the side of the weapon.

## 3.9: Shield Construction ## {#shield-construction}

* Shields must be at least 12" long (as measured by the longest dimension). A
  shield may be as large as you like, but you as an individual must be able to
  safely wield it. A marshal or EH can pull a shield if they feel it is unsafe.
* Shields can be made of any safe material, such as wood, plastic, or cardboard.
  Metal shields are heavy, but are allowed if otherwise safe.
* All shields must have their edges covered by foam. Any protruding metal screws
  or bolts should also be padded.

## 3.10: Equipment Inspections ## {#equipment-inspections}

You must inspect any armor, weapon, or shield before using it. If you are unsure
about an item's safety, ask a marshal and they will inspect it for you. Any item
can be inspected at any time during an event at anyone's request. This is meant
for the purpose of ensuring safety and should never be used for strategic or
tactical purposes. The EH or a designated marshal retains final ruling on the
approval for use of any armor, weapon, or shield.

### Armor Inspection ###

Armor can be failed or the point value of armor may be adjusted for many
reasons. Armor can have exposed edges that could cause a safety concern for the
wearer or other combatants. The EH or designated marshal retains final ruling on
the point value and approval for use of armor.

### Shield Inspection ###

Shields can be failed for many reasons. A shield can have exposed edges or
protrusions that could cause a safety concern for the wearer or other
combatants. A shield can be failed if it has seen too much abuse and has not
been repaired recently. The EH or designated marshal retains final ruling on the
approval for use of a shield.

### Weapon Inspection ###

Weapons can be failed for many reasons. A weapon can have too much "whip" (one
that flexes too much) or not enough "whip" (one that doesn't flex at all). There
is no standard way of measuring flex, you will have to use your common sense. A
weapon can be failed if it has seen too much abuse and has not been repaired
recently. The most common problem weapons have is that their thrusting tips are
breaking down or have been compacted. The EH or marshal retains final ruling on
the approval for use of a weapon.

## 3.11: Combat Calls ## {#combat-calls}

Combat calls are what you may hear yelled in combat, and you must know how these
calls affect your PC.

### Armor ###

Negates a hit attack. When "Armor" (or "Armor 1," "Armor 2," or "Armored Cloak")
is called in combat, it means that the person calling armor is protected against
the attack that landed on them, usually by means of armor or a spell effect.

### Armor-Piercing ### {#armor-piercing}

Armor cannot always protect a PC from certain attacks. If an opponent attacks a
PC in any way and calls out "Armor-Piercing," any of the armor that is struck by
the attack is completely destroyed, and the PC suffers the effect of the blow as
if they were not wearing armor. For example, if a PC is wearing heavy armor on
their right arm, and an opponent hits it while calling "Armor-Piercing," the
PC's armor is destroyed on that arm and they lose the limb.

### Boulder ### {#boulder}

A PC can encounter a boulder call in one of two ways: being hit with a physical
boulder prop or by a weapon simulating the effects of a boulder. In either
instance, the same call of "Boulder!" is used.

If you or any of your equipment are hit by the call of "Boulder!", you suffer
the following effects: your character is dead, any armor hit is "broken" where
the boulder touched the locations, magic items hit by the boulder are
disenchanted, and any non-monetary equipment (i.e. non-enchanted weapons, bows,
and shields) that is hit by the boulder is "broken." It is the player’s
responsibility to see that items damaged this way are not used until the
appropriate repair spells are cast upon them.

A boulder prop is often represented by throwing large duct-taped chunks of foam
or beanbag chairs with the zippers duct-taped over. When thrown, the boulder is
active until it comes completely to rest. PCs may not throw or pick up boulders.
Four or more PCs, using a total of eight hands on the boulder, may work together
to "push" a boulder along, to free trapped gear and companions, but not to cause
damage.

### Disease ### {#disease}

If a weapon strikes a PC and the wielder calls "Disease," wounds on their body
take twice as many spells to be healed until the disease is cured. This effect
only damages a PC, not their armor. For example, if you are hit by a diseased
blow to the leg, [Heal Limb](#heal-limb) would need to be cast twice on the leg
for it to be healed until the disease is cured. Similarly, if you are killed by
a disease shot, the spell [Raise Dead](#raise-dead) will need to be cast twice
on you until you are cured of the disease.

Regeneration effects will still affect a diseased character with a single use,
but the regeneration time is doubled until the disease is cured. Disease can
affect both living and dead characters.

### Fireball ### {#fireball}

If you or any of your equipment are hit by the call of fireball, your character
is dead. Armor and weapons hit by the fireball are not broken, but also do not
protect against its damage. 

The fireball call may come in the form of a thrown prop (as with a magic
missile) or as a weapon blow. Fireball is magical in nature.

### Flat ### {#flat}

To "knock out" an opponent, the attacking player must call out the word "Flat"
prior to their attack. Should a successful killing blow be struck, they have
instead rendered their foe unconscious for a steady count of 300 seconds. The
unconscious PC may be wakened sooner by having another PC come and wake them up
by touching the unconscious PC and saying "Wake Up." The PC can also wake up
when any damage is inflicted on them. You may call "Flat" at any time, even in
the middle of a fight. This form of attack deals no damage to armor.

### Impale ### {#impale}

Impaling is the act of holding a weapon in an opponent's kill location after
death, and saying the word "Impale." It counts as continuous, non-scalping blows
to that location. The act of impaling will bypass any armor, damaged or not.
While impaled, a character cannot be raised or animated and is unable to
regenerate. The results can vary when impaling NPCs.

### Lightning Bolt ### {#lightning-bolt-call}

If you are hit by any part of a white boff arrow and the thrower calls
"Lightning Bolt," your PC is struck as if by a magic armor-piercing weapon (see
the [Magic](#magic-call) and [Armor-Piercing](#armor-piercing) calls in this
section).

### Poison ### {#poison}

There may be occasions where a PC is struck with a blow and the wielder calls
"Poison." If this strike damages a PC in any location, be it torso, arm, leg,
etc., then the PC is killed. When the blow does no damage to a PC, such as a hit
to an off-target area or a hit to armor that protects the PC, then the poison
has no effect. Armor struck with a poison blow is still used. If a PC is under
the effects of a spell that protects them from poison in some fashion, the PC
still takes the normal damage from the blow but the poison will have no
additional effect. Players should also call "Immunity to Poison," to allow an
opponent to understand that you recognized that the blow was poisoned.

### Weapon Type and Material Calls ### {#weapon-type-and-material-calls}

Occasionally, more powerful monsters are only affected by certain weapon types
or by certain materials. For example, axe-mace trolls are typically only injured
by axes and maces; werewolves are only affected by weapons made of silver. It
might be a good habit when using a melee weapon other than a sword, to call the
type of weapon you are using as you swing. If using a mace, say "Mace" with each
swing. When you are wielding a non-normal weapon (e.g., magic or silver), that
weapon will always strike with the same effect therefore you must call that
effect with every swing.

### Magic ### {#magic-call}

If a weapon strikes you and the wielder calls "Magic" (or "Magic Missile"), it
means your PC has been hit with a magical blow. Generally, being hit by magic
doesn't affect your PC any differently than being hit by a normal weapon, but
sometimes PCs are under spell effects where it makes a difference.

### Silver ### {#silver}
If a weapon strikes you and the wielder calls "Silver" it means your PC has been
hit with a silver blow. Being hit by silver doesn't affect your PC any
differently than being hit by a normal weapon.

# 4: Non-Combat Interactions # {#non-combat-interactions}

## 4.1: In-Character and Out-of-Character ## {#in-character-and-out-of-character}

### Being In-Character ###

Generally, events officially begin after the safety rules, any specific site
rules, and other special event rules have been read aloud to the gathered
players.

Once an event has begun, you are expected to be in-character (IC) at all times.
This means that you are playing your PC the whole time you are at an event.
Staying IC can add greatly not only to your own event experience, but to those
who are playing the game around you. When a companion of your PC is "killed" it
adds to the tension and drama of the scene if they pretend they are dead, but it
breaks the mood completely if they are laughing and making comments.

Your character may feel differently than you do about something, like slavery,
magic, politics, or religion. You may be a pacifist, while your character is a
bloodthirsty barbarian. If you can remain true to the character, despite your
differences, you can make a memorable story for yourself and those around you.
Sometimes staying IC is challenging, especially when you know something that
your character shouldn't logically know, but you should try to remain IC when
playing. Likewise, when the game is done, leave your character behind.

### Breaking Character ###

Once an event has begun, breaking character should be done only when necessary.
If you must do so, what you say should be prefaced with "Out-of-character," as
in "Out-of-character, where is the tenting area?" That way, the person you are
addressing knows that it is a real-world concern, and should be dealt wit
 differently than a strictly IC concern.

Sometimes when players get really into character, you may begin to wonder
whether animosity or other emotions are completely IC. It is acceptable to break
character to make sure everything is in fact still IC and no one's feelings are
getting hurt OOC.

### Out-of-Character-Only Terms ###

There are a few terms that should only be used when speaking OOC: “Hold” and
“Medic.” Hold is only used in emergencies as it stops the game. Read [Section
2.3: The Safety Rules](#the-safety-rules) for more information on the correct
use of the word Hold. Medic is used when someone needs immediate real-world
medical attention for any reason: an allergic reaction to a bee-sting, a twisted
ankle, an asthma attack, etc. Do not call “Medic” for imaginary (IC) injuries.
If you need IC medical attention, call "Healer!"

### Out-of-Play Areas and Time-Out ###

The EH has the option of declaring portions of the event site as "out-of-play"
for safety reasons or for NPC use. Never use these out-of-play areas as safe
havens.

If a fight breaks out in an area that is unsafe to fight in or that is
out-of-play, then the fight should be moved to a safe in-play area. If you are
in such an area, you may be asked to leave said area for combat. If you refuse
to leave the unsafe area, your PC is considered dead. After the fight, those
involved can move back to where the fight "really" took place, and continue on.

An EH is free to create an in-game safe area if they choose. For example,
powerful enchantments on the tavern may render weapons and hostile magic
inoperable within the tavern walls. In this case, it is fine for players to hide
there, since they will be taking advantage of an in-game effect.

EHs may also declare a time-out during an event for sleep, dinner, etc. While on
an event site, if you are not acting as an NPC at the EH's request, or you are
not in a time-out, a character is liable to be attacked, and their possessions
open to theft.

## 4.2: Dragging ## {#dragging}

To drag a dead, unconscious, or otherwise incapacitated body in our game, you
must place a hand on the shoulder, back, or arm of the body and say "Drag." The
player being dragged must then get up and walk with you, bringing what they are
carrying with them. Stealable items stay on a dragged corpse unless explicitly
searched off. A dragged body is considered one-handed and may not be used as a
weapon or a shield. At any time you may tell the dragged player "Drop," thereby
letting go of the player and dropping them on the ground. A body being dragged
can never be "thrown" or "tossed." If the person dragging the body lets go, then
the body should drop in place.

## 4.3: Searching and Theft ## {#searching-and-theft}

There are certain items that are referred to as being "Stealable." Some examples
of stealable items are magic items, magic weapons, Realms currency, silver
weapons, and occasionally non-magical items. With the exception of currency, the
word "Stealable" is likely written somewhere on the object.

Players must assume that any props or items used by event staff are not
stealable unless labeled as such or told otherwise by event staff.

### Searching ###

Searching is a touchy subject. In the real world, if a bandit has just killed
someone they can just take everything they own. In the Realms, an object has to
be considered stealable to be taken from a person or location without the
owner's permission. The problem is that often these stealable items are not
easily recognizable, especially the smaller items. Also, while "secret pockets"
and such seem like a good idea at first, frisking a dead character could be
considered a form of harassment towards the player and should be avoided. To
handle this situation, the searching rule exists.

The searching rule is verbose because there have been a lot of problems about
searching in the past. The rule is mostly common sense. Once you think about it,
it will seem quite simple. There are two ways you can search someone, using a
Point Search or Full Search.

### Point Search ###

To simulate ransacking a character's pouches, weapons, and clothing quickly, a
player can "point search." Essentially, the searcher says "Search" and tells the
victim where they are searching (e.g., "I search your pouch.") If there are
stealable items in the area being searched, then all the items in that area are
handed over immediately. The area that a person point-searches cannot be any
larger than one hit location on the body (e.g., you would have to search each
sleeve of a shirt and the front and back of a shirt to search everywhere inside
the shirt). Pockets and pouches have to be pointed out to be searched. You
cannot say "I'm searching all your pockets," you have to search each one
individually; left and right sleeves, boots, gloves, etc., all have to be
searched separately, one at a time. Only one person can point search a victim at
a time. Point searching does not wake up an unconscious character.

### Full Search ###

The other way to search someone is to simulate taking your time to do it
thoroughly. That is, the character simulates stripping the body from head to
toe, ripping everything to shreds, garnering every last item you own, etc. In
order to do this the searcher simply says "Full search." Every stealable item
the victim has must be handed over to the searcher. The characters should take
120 seconds to do this. If so, then the items should be considered the IC
possessions of the searching character. Full searching will wake up an
unconscious character.

If someone full-searches a character and a different character comes by during
that time and point-searches the victim, the full search is stopped and the
point search is resolved. If a character does not specify what kind of search
they are performing, then it is assumed that they are performing a point search.
If told only that they are being searched, the player whose character is being
searched must assume it is a point search and respond, "Where?"

### Realms Thieves ###

The only objects that are always in-play, are fair game for theft, and can be
stolen without consulting the bearer of the object, are those considered
stealable in-game (see [Section 4.4: In-Game Items](#in-game-items), below). In
order to steal any other object, you must have the explicit permission of the
owner/bearer before making the theft. This means that to steal another PC's
jewelry (assuming that some of it is considered treasure), you must ask the
person who plays that PC. One way to do this is to kill or flat the character
and tell them that you are searching them. If they have anything that is
in-play, they must show it to you, for you to take or leave as you wish. You
should never pick up something off a table or from in front of someone's tent,
unless it is a magic or silver weapon, or Realms currency.

It should be restated that people's tents, bags, packs, and pouches are
completely off-limits and out-of-play. No matter how many magic or silver
weapons, or how much Realms currency someone might have, you may never, under
any circumstances, enter their tent or go into their bags, packs, or pouches and
take anything out without the owner's explicit permission.

A magic item is the property of the EH that created it. It is the EH's will that
the item be able to be circulated around the Realms by theft, as a gift, as part
of an inheritance, or any other means so long as it occurs at an event.

IC theft, not gift, of stealable items in OOC situations, not at an event, is
not acceptable and will not be upheld.

## 4.4: In-Game Items ## {#in-game-items}

### Currency ###

Various groups and nations issue different currencies for use as treasure and to
pay for goods and services in-game. These currencies are often represented by
stamped metal disks or roofing tins, sometimes bearing printed stickers for
identification or are minted in metals, plastic or even clay. In-game these
currencies usually represent Gold or Silver. Denominations vary from currency to
currency. Generally ten silver pieces are worth one gold piece. The more prized
issues are backed, meaning that if you accumulate enough of any one currency,
you can trade those coins in to the issuer for goods, weapons, or services. Many
older coinages and silver pieces are not backed, and while they're still
in-play, many people either heavily discount them or don't accept them at all.
Issues and worth of coins fluctuate. If you're in doubt as to what a coin is
worth, ask the merchants and the gamblers. Realms currency cannot be
counterfeited; to do so is cheating.

### Silver Weapons ###

Silver weapons are created by players with the spell [Reforge](#reforge) or are
released by EHs.

### Magic Items and Magic Weapons ###

All magic items and magic weapons are stealable.

Magic weapons must be made with a blue-colored striking surface, so that they
are distinctive. No permanent magic item may be issued by anyone except an EH
(see [Section 7: Realms Administration](#realms-administration) for more
information).

Should a magic item or weapon become broken or disenchanted at an event, it
requires a repair through the [Reforge](#reforge) spell to return to a
functioning state. Additionally, magic items which have been revoked by their
EH/creator are no longer considered magic items and also revert back to the EH
who created them. Magic weapons that are currently in existence may be re-bladed
without the use of a [Reforge](#reforge) spell, to repair safety issues, by
first contacting and gaining permission from the issuing or backing EH.

### Event-Stealable ### {#event-stealable}

The props for certain spells and items as designated by the EH are considered
"Event-Stealable," meaning that they are stealable treasure during an event, but
should be returned to their OOC owner when you leave an event. Before you leave
an event site, you must return (to the best of your ability) any items marked as
"Event-Stealable" to the EH or MM. Props for PC spells are returned by the EH or
MM as an OOC courtesy, and will be done so without revealing the identity of the
thief. If you have a spell that has an event-stealable prop as a component, you
may replace it without penalty at the next event if it is not returned to you
for whatever reason. You can never declare permanently stealable items as
event-stealable.

# 5: Character Creation # {#character-creation}

## 5.1: The Social Structure ## {#the-social-structure}

The Realms is not governed by a single kingdom. Each nation has its own
hierarchy and structure. There are no hard rules for governing the social
structure. Claiming land and titles is anyone's prerogative. The social
structure really only has one rule: if you can back up your title or claim then
you deserve to hold it. If you can't, then you should have nothing to complain
about if you get put in your place.

## 5.2: Creating a Character ## {#creating-a-character}

If you are already familiar with role-playing in general, or with live action
role-playing specifically, you probably already know how to make a character. If
you are new to the concept of role-playing, the following questions might help
you establish the traits and characteristics of your PC. You should try to
answer the questions for yourself, but some suggestions are provided.

_What is your character's species?_ There are as many species available in the
Realms as there are minds to create them. In the Realms, there are no
restrictions on what species you can play. The only rule is that you may gain no
special benefits or specialized abilities for playing a certain race or person
(the only way to gain supernatural powers is through legally released items,
the spell system, or by being appointed a _Knight of the Realms_ or a _Knight
of the Eternal Flame_). If you create your own "race," you would do well to
consider its mannerisms, average age, codes of ethic, etc. Of course humans are
the easiest to play, since you are probably human.

_What is your character's age?_ If you are playing a human character, it is
usually best to pick an age near your own. Other species may have different
average ages.

_Why is your character an adventurer?_ Most people of the Realms prefer the
relatively safe life of a farmer or craftsman. Why has your character left home
to join in the rather hazardous occupation of hero? The answer to this might
give you some valuable insight into the persona of your character.

_What is your character's background?_ There is no limit on where your character
came from. As was stated before, your character can come from anywhere, so long
as they gain no IC benefits from it.

_Does your character have a lifetime goal, dream, or driving force?_ Goals
define characters well, and how far they are willing to go to attain that goal
rounds them off.

## 5.3: Fighters ## {#fighters}

Fighters are capable of using any weapon style, to the limits of the [Wielding
Weapons](#wielding-weapons) section. They may use up to 2-point armor (heavy
armor) for each hit location. They are not considered enchanted beings unless
stated in the [Enchanted Beings Caveat](#enchanted-beings).

## 5.4: Being a Realms Spellcaster ## {#being-a-realms-spellcaster}